It might be interjected, ‘Though the yogi does not perceive a chariot, there is a perception of the mere collection of it
s parts.’1To explain: It is quite comical for someone to be scouring for yarn amongst the ashes of burnt wool.The chario
t has no existence, and withoutAn owner of the parts, its parts cannot exist.‘If the chariot is disassembled, wouldn’t o
ne still perceive a pile consisting of its wheels and so forth? How can you then claim that, “…without an owner of the p
arts, its parts cannot exist”?’That is not so. It is only when the perceiver’s understanding is related to a chariot tha
t the wheels and other such parts will be thought of as a chariot, and not when the cognition is different, in which cas
e the wheels and so forth may themselves be understood as possessors of parts on the basis of their own constituents. Wh
en wheels and so forth have no relationship at all to a chariot, they will not be thought of as parts of a chariot.This 
point may further be understood through the following example:Like parts that vanish when a chariot is burnt,Are parts w
hose owner has been scorched by reason’s flames. (6.161)For example, when the part-possessing chariot is burnt, its part
s too are certainly consumed. In a similar way, when the rubbing of the sticks of analysis produces the fire of reason w
hich consumes things into imperceptibility, and the chariot is thus burnt to the point of intangibility, since the parts
too become fuel for the fires of reason and will certainly be burnt, they do not retain their identity.

And just as the analytical consideration of a chariot that establishes it as a dependent imputation, allows one not to in
fringe upon the relative truth, and allows yogis to easily access the actual reality of things:Just so the world at larg
e agrees the self is basedUpon the aggregates, the elements and onThe sense fields, it is what assimilates these things.
Just as the chariot is imputed in relation to the wheels and so forth, where the assimilated are the wheels and other pa
rts and the assimilator is the chariot, the self assimilates the five aggregates, the six elements and six sense fields,
as the self is imputed in relation to the aggregates and so forth. This is saying that, just as a chariot is the assimi
lation of the wheels and so forth, the self is likewise the assimilation of the aggregates and so forth.And just as this
classification of the assimilated and the assimilator is a worldly convention, the classification of the roles of acted
and actor is accepted in a similar fashion to the chariot. To explain:Assimilation is the act and actor too. (6.162)Thi
s presentation is saying that the assimilation (upadāna) is the act in the sense of the aggregates and so forth, and the
actor in the sense of the self.

If dependent imputations are related to correctly, they will not encourage ideas such as those of constancy or inconstanc
y, and concepts such as permanence, impermanence and so forth will easily be avoided. To express this:It is not real, th
us not a constant entity,Is not inconstant, has no birth and no decay.Such qualities as permanence do not apply.It’s not
the same, nor something that is quite distinct. (6.163)This self which is imputed in relation to the aggregates is not 
a constant thing, nor is it inconstant. If the self were inconstant, this would contradict the Treatise where it states:
The assimilated, which ariseAnd cease to be, are not the self.How indeed could the assimilatedBecome that which assimila
tes.2And:Something cannot come from nothing.Unwanted consequences would ensue:The self would be something produced,And t
hough arisen, would not have a cause.3Therefore, if the aggregates were the self, it would then arise and cease, yet it 
is not held to be something arising and ceasing. It would therefore make sense to draw the conclusion that the aggregate
s are not the self. It is hence not tenable that it is something inconstant.That it is constant is just as untenable, as
it is stated:It is not tenable to sayThat it existed in times past.What took place in former livesIs not identical to t
his.One may think, ‘That was myself,’But the assimilated was different then.And what indeed is your own selfApart from w
hat is assimilated.4When saying it has no birth and no decay, this is indicative of the statement the Master made about 
these two qualities when giving the unwanted consequence that, ‘It would be appearing and disappearing.’5And concerning 
the line such qualities as permanence do not apply, as the Master states when considering the self through the analysis 
of the Tathāgata:How could there in this peaceBe the four of permanence and so forth?How could there in this peaceBe the
four of finiteness and so forth?He who grasps the gross ideaThat the Tathāgata exists,Has the idea that when transcende
dHe will no longer exist.But being empty of inherent natureIt does not make sense to thinkThat he is existent or non-exi
stentWhen having passed beyond.6It is not the same, nor is it something quite distinct from the aggregates. As stated:If
the self were the aggregates,It would be appearing and disappearing.If it was different from the aggregates,It would no
t have the aggregates’ characteristics.7Similarly:Fuel is not the same as the fire.…8And why can one not entertain these
ideas of constancy and so forth in relation to the self? Because, as it says, it is not real. If the self were by natur
e a real entity, ideas such as constancy and so forth could be relevant to it. But the self cannot have any of these sin
ce it does not exist. As stated in a sutra:Four imperishable dharmasAre taught by the World Protector:Beings, space, the
awakening mind,As well as the Buddha qualities.If these were substantialThey would be considered perishable.But being n
on-existent they do not perish,And are therefore called imperishable.9

The sevenfold analysis demonstrates that there is not something either permanent or impermanent. But for those failing to
see its non-existence, ignorance leads to the belief in its existence, and this view of identity which clings to the id
ea, ‘This is me,’ keeps them circling in cyclic existence.This self – the sense of ego that is always feltBy every kind 
of being, and the sense of ‘mine’Which is all that relates to it – confusion spawnsAs customary fact when left unanalyse
d. (6.164)After searching for it and finding through reasoning that it is unfeasible, the tīrthikas who are mistaken abo
ut its nature, believe it to be distinct from the aggregates. Those of our own side, when fooled by the idea that the se
lf cannot exist separate from the aggregates, assert that the self is just the aggregates themselves. But those having a
n unmistaken understanding of the Tathāgata’s teachings will think that this is not how it is, and that the self is free
from this type of thinking in all ways.10 They understand that in all the states of being associated with ignorance – h
umans, spirits, animals and so forth – a sense of self is constantly present, and that influenced by this labelling, any
thing or anyone related with it, associated with it – whether internal entities such as eyes, or external things – becom
e encompassed by the idea of ownership. This self is not established in and of itself but comes about through lack of un
derstanding.

Because confusion is the cause of this conventional designation despite such thing existing, yogis do not apprehend anyth
ing whatsoever, and not apprehending eyes and so forth will neither have any grasping towards them. And as yogis apprehe
nd nothing possessing inherent reality, they are liberated from cyclic existence. As stated:When the ideas of ‘I’ and ‘m
ine’Whether inner or outer cease,Grasping is halted, and as that endsThere ceases to be further births.11But how is it t
hat ownership cannot occur without a self? To explain this it was stated:Without a maker there is nothing made,And thus 
without an ‘I’ there is no ‘mine.’And with the view that ‘I’ and ‘mine’ are void,It’s liberation that the yogis reach. (
6.165)Just as without a potter there a pot cannot come to be, without an ‘I’ there can be no ‘mine.’ Therefore, as they 
do not apprehend ‘I’ and ‘mine,’ yogis have no cyclic perception and reach liberation. Without apprehending forms and so
forth, attachment and other emotional involvement with these will not occur, and by this hearers and solitary buddhas a
re established in transcendence without any further existences. Bodhisattvas however, although they have seen selflessne
ss, will out of compassion maintain their link with existence until awakening. Wise individuals should therefore examine
this presentation of selflessness well.

To add that, in the same way that the analysis of the chariot relates to the imputation of the self and what it assimilat
es, it is applicable to all other things as well:A pot, a blanket, straw mats, armies, woods, a necklace, or a tree,A ho
use, a cart, a cottage, or else anything that it may beThese are not found to exist in any of the seven ways when subjec
ted to the analysis of the chariot. And here it may be added: and yet, according to general consensus they exist. And ot
her types of things of similar sort:Should likewise be acknowledged as they’re generally made out to be,… just as consen
sus thinks they are without analysing. And why?Because the Mighty Sage would not with normal people disagree. (6.166)As 
stated in the scriptures:The world may quarrel with me, but I have no quarrel with the world.12One should thus not discr
edit the general consensus of the world.

‘So how does the world designate things as conventions?’ To explain this it is said:The parts and whole, the traits and q
ualified, the wish and he who wants,The features, featured, fuel and fire, and all pairs like these are whenExamined lik
e the cart shown to exist in none of seven ways.And yet, according to the general consensus they exist. (6.167)Just as a
pot is the whole while clay and so forth are its parts; the pot is the qualified while the dark pattern of flames and s
o forth are traits; and the pot is the featured, while its features are being pot-bellied, having a spout, a long neck a
nd so forth. This similarly applies to blankets and so forth. To wish is to have a craving. He who wants is the support 
for the wish. Fire is that which burns; fuel that which is burnt.It’s based on the parts that a whole is imputed, and ba
sed on the whole that parts are imputed, as in the example of the chariot. So too with the rest, including fire in relat
ion to the fuel, and fuel in relation to fire. These are worldly conventions that cannot be subjected to analysis.

To explain that not only are such things, parts and so forth, established only in mutual dependence, even causes and effe
cts are mutually dependent: Because…A cause will only be a cause when there’s a product it has made.If it does not produ
ce results, it lacks that which makes it a cause.Results will likewise only come about when there exists a cause.This sh
ould be understood as saying that, in the case of cause and result too, it is only when there is one that there is the o
ther. Causes and results do not have any inherent existence.And if you dare to presume that these two are established in
and of themselves, then… my word!So tell me then, which one derives from which? Which is the first to come? (6.168)Is i
t the cause or the result which precedes the other, and from which is either the cause or the result then made? Among th
em, is the cause or the result the first? Understand therefore that cause and result are relative imputations alike unto
the chariot, and not inherently real.

Furthermore, if a cause really produces a result, is there contact or not when it is produced? For instance,If you sugges
t that there is contact when a cause makes a result,Then they’re a single force; the maker and result are not distinct.I
f they’re apart, non-causes are not different from what is the cause.Discarding these two options there’s no other notio
n possible. (6.169)If the cause and result connect during production, as they connect they are one, just as there is no 
difference in the water when a river meets the ocean. And as one cannot then differentiate between them by saying, ‘This
is the cause; that is the result,’ what is then produced by what? If they do not meet during production, just as other 
non-results are not produced when there is no meeting, its result should likewise not be produced when there is no meeti
ng. But if there is production without contact, then anything can be produced.For someone who claims that there are inhe
rent causes and results, it is not possible to come up with a third option other than the product and the producer eithe
r being in contact or not, and the only conclusion must therefore be that there is no inherently real causal production.

Therefore,But if your cause produces no result, results do not exist.And when causes do not produce results, there are no
results, which means that:And causes that have no results are not as causes justified.It is the causal function of givi
ng rise to results that makes it a cause. If there were causes even in the absence of results, the causal quality of the
cause would then not have anything to do with causality, which can’t be accepted. Causes and results cannot therefore b
e inherently existent.‘So how do you suggest it is then?’But since these two are both just like illusions I am not at fa
ultIn granting that the factual things of worldly life can still appear. (6.170)In the case of distinctively characteris
ed entities produced and their producers, this analysis will apply. If, however, it is the case that the production of t
hings is a mistaken imputation, their nature being as unarisen as illusions, and even though unreal they can still be co
nceptual objects like things such as the hairs appearing to one with cataracts, these considerations are not relevant. T
he faults mentioned above will not then apply to me, and the things of the world, existing as they are if left unanalyse
d, remain accounted for.

