At this some may reply: ‘You will be liable to the same criticism as when saying that cause and result must either be in 
contact or not during production. How so?’‘Does your critique make contact with the criticised, or does it not?This may 
be asked, and aren’t you then accountable to this same fault?’‘If, during these critical remarks, the criticism makes co
ntact with the criticised, there will be the same problem. And equally so if it does not make contact. Discarding these 
two options there is no other notion possible.’‘Thus, as your criticism does not have the power to discredit the critici
sed, your criticism itself is discredited, and as a matter of course the reality of causes and results are then establis
hed. To express this point:’‘As what you say will only serve to quash the view you hold yourself,Your criticism lacks th
e power to discredit what you aim.’ (6.171)

‘Furthermore,‘Because your cavilling is subject to the self-same consequenceAnd your denial of existent things is quite u
nreasonable,Insightful persons will not be convinced by what you have to say.You argue just to quarrel and have no posit
ion of your own.’ (6.172)‘That your cavilling is subject to the self-same consequence has already been mentioned. That y
our denial of existent things is quite unreasonable shall now be explained. How to respond to the argument that things t
hat are equally not in contact do not produce anything? A magnet will exert a pull on metals close to it without touchin
g them, but not on all. And eyes can see forms within their scope without touching them, but not all. Similarly, even th
ough causes can produce things without contact, that does not mean that everything not in contact with it will be produc
ed. Also, you’re arguing just to quarrel: to argue just to refute others’ position without presenting any position of yo
ur own, is to argue just to quarrel. And you don’t have any position of your own, because your own presentation is made 
purely to refute the position of others.’

To this we reply:To claim that it’s an issue whether this critique makes contact withThe criticised or not while criticis
ing will only applyTo those thinking in absolutes, but we do not endorse a stance,And therefore this unwanted consequenc
e does not apply to us. (6.173)Concerning the statement because your cavilling is subject to the self-same consequence; 
it is not in fact the case that this consequence applies equally to ourselves, because in our point of view the critique
does not make contact with the criticised while criticising, nor does it not make contact, since neither the critique n
or the criticised are inherently established.Do not therefore entertain the idea that there must be either contact or no
t. As stated:[…]: … Venerable Subhūti. Does the attainment when not yet attained already exist as something, or does it 
not?Subhūti replied: Venerable Śāriputra. I do not think the attainment when not yet attained already exists as somethin
g, nor that it does not already exist as something.Śāriputra said: But, venerable Subhūti, is there then no attainment a
nd no realisation?Subhūti replied: Venerable Śāriputra, there is both attainment and realisation, but not in a dualistic
manner. Attainment and realisation are worldly conventions, venerable Śāriputra. The stream-enterer, once-returner, non
-returner, arhat, solitary buddha and bodhisattva are worldly conventions, but ultimately there is neither attainment no
r realisation.1Here, that the attainment attained can exist or not exist as something is refuted as duality would be a c
onsequence, and duality is unreasonable for a non-entity, so attainment is accepted as a worldly convention when not ana
lysed. Similarly, although the criticised and the critique neither connect nor do not connect, there can still be the co
nvention of the critique discrediting the criticised.

Also,As when the features of the sun being eclipsedAre also seen in its reflected silhouette,That sun and likeness meet o
r not is ludicrous,It happens in dependence, just conventionally. (6.174)

Although unreal, it helps us beautify our face.Just so, these arguments that have the power toRefine the face of wisdom c
an’t be verified.And still, know that the proof they give is realised. (6.175)What we call a reflection is not real in t
he slightest, so it is neither here nor there to think that it must occur in contact with the disc of the sun or not. An
d still, with a certain proximity to the form, one will certainly have the perception of the reflection as expected. It 
is the same with the critique that is empty of inherent existence but can still discredit the criticised, and the argume
nt which is empty of inherence and can’t be verified, but can still prove what it sets out to prove. One should take fro
m this that our own words are not subject to the self-same consequence, since it does not follow that there is a duality
.Since it is the very visage of wisdom itself, it is referred to as the face of wisdom. To refine it means to make it im
maculate by removing ignorance. That they have the power to means that this power or ability is seen in them. Since clai
ming that there is this duality does not make sense to those for whom it is an imputation, they will not be able to harm
the Middle Way in any way whatsoever with critiques and replies based on this duality. As Āryadeva states:However long 
one may attemptOne cannot pinpoint any faultIn he who holds to neither stance:‘It is’, ‘is not’, ‘is both’, or ‘none.’2L
ikewise:When the argument is emptinessAnd someone offers a reply,It’s just like no reply at allAs it assumes what’s bein
g proved.3This also clarifies the case of productive causes. Some4 , however, will suggest that the Middle Way Treatise 
is here dealing specifically with productive causes and not with rhetorics, that the conflicts involved in contact versu
s non-contact apply to rhetorical causality and not productivity, and that this is why we are not guilty of making spuri
ous arguments.5 But this will not suffice as a reply. One will not find the opponent very amiable when saying things tha
t are so encumbered by problematic issues, and since rhetorics are alike to productivity in having such issues, this in 
an insufficient reply. Also, in their attempt to deflect the accusation of spurious reasoning they use the arguments the
y themselves accept to prove the assertions of the Treatise, only ending up at the receiving end of critiques made by op
ponents. This is what makes our own replies all the more elegant.

Furthermore,Yes, if the reason used as proof were something real,And real also the thing that we attempt to prove,The arg
ument of contact would be relevant.Since it’s not so you’re only troubling yourself. (6.176)You’re pointlessly wearing y
ourself out on our behalf by arraying the faults of a flawed position against a flawless position. For example, if someo
ne has cataracts and sees hairs, discrediting that there are just one, or are many, that they are long, circular, black 
or the like, will have no effect on those with the disease. And it is the same when in the analysis of causes and result
s that have no inherent existence your criticism is based in dualism – it will have no effect. Understand therefore that
the examples presented here, of there being activity without contact – such as the eyes, the magnet and so forth – are 
disproved, as the same consequence applies to them.

You give up the straight path of non-inherence for the windy road of philosophical speculation. Applying your atrocious c
onceptual handiwork, you gladly block the authentic route. Why make such immense trouble for yourself?!Furthermore,That 
all things lack reality we show with ease.But it’s no easy matter for our challengerTo demonstrate how things exist inhe
rently.Why tax the world with webs of shoddy pedantry? (6.177)To back up our position we use the examples of dreams, ill
usions and so forth, and are thus able to bring about an understanding that the things of the world lack inherent existe
nce. But it is not as easy to demonstrate the idea that things have inherent existence, because there are no examples fo
r that which are agreed upon by both of us. This being the case, we can repel any argument while none can provide adequa
te replies.Is there anyone who is encouraging you to continue this disservice to the world? The afflicted world is like 
a silkworm trapped in the cocoon of its own concepts, so why add to that by stringing a tight web around it using the co
rds of shoddy pedantry? So give up this squabbling! Things are like reflections, and there are no such things as particu
lar or universal characteristics, so what does it matter whether it’s direct perception or inference? There is only one 
direct perception when it comes down to it, and that is the wisdom of omniscience.

Also,If having grasped the prior points, now please forgetThis extra censure, that of touch, expressly made.It wasn’t jus
t for frivolous wrangling this was said,But so that such additional points are recognised. (6.178)When further types of 
criticism are already understood from the arguments directed at the opposing side using the principles of interdependenc
e and dependent imputation, one should avoid replying to those who ask, ‘Does the cause make contact with the result dur
ing production, or not?’, with this criticism. The purpose of the Treatise is to counteract conceptions, and since our p
oint has already been made, why should the Treatise be used to further frivolous wrangling (vitaṇḍa)?6 We are not here e
liminating the others’ positions, because there are no real things to be eliminated. So how can this be frivolous wrangl
ing? According to how frivolous wrangling is defined, the proper definition of it involves someone establishing their ow
n position while refuting the position of others, which means that the definition of frivolous wrangling is not met in a
ny way whatsoever. Similar additional criticisms may be understood from this point.

The selflessness of phenomena is clarified in the verses beginning, ‘It can’t come from itself …’ (6.8), until the verse 
ending with, ‘Analytical reasoning provides swift liberation’ (6.119). The selflessness of the person is dealt with from
the verse beginning, ‘They see how each and every affliction and fault originates with the view of identity’ (6.120), u
ntil this point. To indicate this and express the classifications of emptiness, it was said:That beings may be freed, th
is selflessness was taughtIn two ways, of phenomena and personal.In short, this selflessness was taught as being of two 
types: phenomenal selflessness and personal selflessness. Why was selflessness presented in these two ways? As it says, 
that beings may be freed: the Illustrious One presented these two types of selfless in order to liberate beings. The sel
flessness of the person is taught in order that solitary buddhas and hearers may be liberated, while both are taught in 
order that bodhisattvas may be liberated through attaining the state of omniscience. Although hearers and solitary buddh
as do come to see the mere conditionality of dependent arising, they do not have a complete practice of the selflessness
of phenomena, but only the means of abandoning the afflictions experienced in the three realms. It is explained that th
ey do have a comprehensive practice of the selflessness of the person.And to his followers our Teacher taught the sameBy
classifying it in various different ways. (6.179)Apart from this twofold classification of selflessness, the Illustriou
s One also taught it in many other ways to suit the various inclinations of his students.

Concerning these,When emptiness is taught elaboratelyIt is of sixteen types, and when condensedIt is of four types – this
is the approachAdopted in the Greater Vehicle. (6.180)The sixteen emptinesses are taught in the statement:Furthermore, 
Subhūti, the Greater Vehicle of the bodhisattva is the following: emptiness of the internal, emptiness of the external, 
emptiness of the external internal, emptiness of emptiness, emptiness of immensity, emptiness of the ultimate, emptiness
of the compounded, emptiness of the uncompounded, emptiness of the boundless, emptiness of no beginning or end, emptine
ss of what should not be spurned, emptiness of true nature, emptiness of all phenomena, emptiness of defining characteri
stics, emptiness of the unobservable and emptiness of real non-things.7And after that the four types of emptiness are ta
ught:Furthermore, Subhūti, things are empty of things. Non-things are empty of non-things. Self-nature is empty of self-
nature. A nature beyond is empty of a nature beyond.8These emptinesses are what we call the Greater Vehicle. Neither emp
tiness nor non-emptiness exist even in the slightest. These are nothing more than relative conventions, just like form a
nd so forth, useful when instructing individuals. As the Treatise states:If anything at all could be non-empty,There cou
ld be something that is empty.But as there is nothing at all that is not empty,How could the empty then be?9One should n
ot declare ‘empty,’‘Not empty,’ ‘both,’Nor ‘neither’ – these are justNominal designations.10

