Similarly, one should understand thatIt’s similar to cataract-inflicted eyesWhen spirits see a river’s water being pus.It
was previously explained that, ‘The mind sees hairs through the influence of this disease …,’1 and any other similar ca
ses may be considered along the same lines; but we shall desist from elaborating more for now.In short, please understan
d that, just as what you knowHas no existence, neither does the mind itself. (6.71)One should come to recognise that jus
t as knowable objects have no inherent existence, the mind too that entertains images of knowable objects is in and of i
tself un-produced. As stated:Without a knowing there’s no known;And lacking that, no consciousness.Hence you declared th
at knowing andThe known lack inherent existence.2Similarly,Consciousness is like an illusion –Thus spoke The Sun’s Kinsm
an.And what it perceives is likewiseCertainly like illusory things.3Those who are seized by this consciousness-claiming 
madness4 and deny external objects, are sure to plunge into the ravine of self-hood, and must therefore be treated by no
ble compassionate practitioners with an excellent and harsh mantric cure of scripture and reasoning.

Thus, having shown how there cannot be consciousness without external objects, in order to reject the position that it si
mply must exist, it is said:And if detached from subject-object there could beDependent nature, empty of duality,Then wh
o would know of its existence? Just to say,‘It’s there but not perceived,’ is quite unreasonable. (6.72)If a dependent n
ature empty of so-called apprehended and apprehender exists, through what cognition do you apprehend its existence? It i
s untenable that it apprehends itself, since it is contradictory for something to direct its act upon itself: the blade 
of a sword cannot cut itself; the tip of a finger cannot touch itself; even the strongest and most dextrous athlete isn’
t able to climb onto his own shoulders; fire cannot burn itself; and an eye cannot look at itself. Another cognition can
not be apprehending it since that would conflict with your own tenets; if cognition was the object of another cognition,
one could then say that this undermines the sense of cognition only. Hence there is no way whatsoever that there can be
an apprehender of it; and that which cannot be apprehended cannot exist.

Now they reply, ‘It isn’t actually a case of another apprehending something else, but it has reflexive awareness. And sin
ce reflexive awareness apprehends itself, that shows it to be existent.’ To show how this can’t be, we explain:It isn’t 
proven to experience itself.It is unproven that it can so-called ‘apprehend itself.’There are those who cite the Sautrān
tika position in order to prove reflexive awareness: ‘When a fire is kindled it will simultaneously illumine itself toge
ther with vases and other things without distinction. And words signify both themselves and a referent. Similarly, when 
consciousness occurs it can fully discern itself and objects without distinction. Hence, reflexive awareness most certai
nly exists.‘Though unwilling, one must by necessity accept reflexive awareness. Otherwise, when remembering the experien
ce, “I saw …,” one wouldn’t then remember both the object as well as the experience, “I saw it.” Why? The memory would b
e of the experienced object, while the knowing of it would not have been experienced and could not then be remembered.‘A
s long as awareness is not reflexive it cannot be experienced. And that there is another cognition experiencing it is un
reasonable. Why? If the cognition experiencing it is other, the consequence will be that of infinite regress. If you acc
ept that immediately following one cognition distinguishing the colour blue, there is a consciousness distinguishing tha
t, one would need yet another experiencer of the cognition of the cognition of blue; and then yet another again; leading
to the fault of infinite regress.‘And it can’t be that cognition discerns something separate from it, since then all st
rings of awareness would be objects of distinct consciousnesses, and sentient beings only have a single stream of consci
ousness. It is like a stack of a hundred blue lotus-petals being pierced; consciousness engages with things in successio
n, but so rapidly that it appears to be happening simultaneously.5 Hence, to avoid the fault of infinite regress one mus
t necessarily accept reflexive awareness.‘With that, both objects involved when subsequently remembering the thought “I 
saw …” will be accounted for. But if the nature of cognition isn’t known by reflexive awareness, it’s illogical that its
object can be remembered. And so, as the subsequent memory “I saw…” appears to one’s cognition, it may be inferred that
the trigger for the cognitive experience of a subsequent memory containing both these objects must have been an experie
nce of its own nature and the nature of the object. The subsequent memory proves the experience of oneself; and when exp
erience of oneself exists, the dependent nature exists. You asked, “What would then know of its existence?”6 This is the
answer.’To show that this is illogical, it was said:It isn’t proven to experience itself.And if you say a later memory 
is proof,You’re giving something that is unproven as proof;And what’s not proven cannot function as a proof. (6.73)If th
is is the proof they now present to substantiate it, since memory is impossible in that it’s produced neither from self 
nor from other, how could the unproven memory prove the unproven reflexive awareness? Even in terms of worldly conventio
ns it would be impossible for memory to be the result of reflexive awareness. How so? If, as in the case of fire, cognit
ion is used to prove reflexive awareness – and because of its presence, like fire is deduced from smoke, one is to be co
nvinced of its existence via the subsequent occurrence of memory – since this reflexive awareness remains something unpr
oven, how could memory, the result of reflexive awareness and something that doesn’t occur if reflexive awareness doesn’
t exist, exist? One can’t be certain of the presence of a water-crystal gem just from seeing water, or a fire-crystal ge
m just from seeing fire, because even without these water may be the result of such phenomena as rain, and fire may be p
roduced for instance by rubbing sticks together. In the same way, this shows that memory may arise in the absence of ref
lexive awareness. And therefore, since memory as a result of reflexive awareness is non-existent without it, you’re givi
ng something unproven as proof. In proving reflexive awareness, this unproven term ‘memory’ has no relevance as evidence
– just like thinking of sound’s impermanence as something perceived by the eyes.

But say we dispense with such analysis:But let’s assume that self-awareness is affirmed.That memory remembers it is still
unsound,Because it’s other, like an unknown in one’s mind.This argument will conquer any counterclaim. (6.74)If we do s
ay that cognition is aware of itself and the object, it is still illogical for a remembering cognition to remember them,
because the remembering cognition is accepted as other in relation to the cognition that experienced the object. The re
flexive awareness and experience of the object that happened in Maitreya’s mind will not be remembered by Upagupta, beca
use he didn’t experience them. Similarly, seeing as they are other, it would be just like an unknown mind appearing to o
neself, and a subsequent consciousness taking place within a stream of mind cannot therefore have that memory, because i
t didn’t experience that cognition and object.Now, one may think that such a memory can exist, since this is a case of a
single continuum where things have a causal relationship. But this too is not the case because we have an argument whic
h defeats any objection. The argument of stating, ‘Since they are other …,’ will utterly defeat any counterclaims such a
s, ‘They are part of the same continuum,’ or, ‘They are in a causal relationship,’ and so on. Since a moment of recollec
ting cognition would come about subsequent to the experience, it is something other; and being in that way just the same
as having a cognition of another stream of mind, we may say that it isn’t of a single continuum as the cognition that e
xperienced, or in a causal relationship, and so forth. So this argument of stating that they are other is a sweeping ref
utation.

They might then ask, ‘How do you explain it?’ To clarify:For us, the one who has the memory is notDistinct from he who ha
d experience of something.To think, ‘I saw,’ is therefore memory to us,As is the way conventional worldly people think. 
(6.75)I have already explained in relation to the experience of an object, how between the cognition that experienced th
e object and the cognition that remembers there cannot be otherness. And since, when there has been an experience, the r
ememberer is not another, it isn’t the case that the cognition which remembers that experience is not the experiencer, a
nd the memory can therefore appear with the object. Since it isn’t the case that the discernment of the experiencing cog
nition isn’t the discernment of the rememberer, one can have the thought, ‘I saw….’ This is also the worldly viewpoint, 
which shouldn’t be subjected to rigorous analysis, since the conventions of the world operate on false premises.

This being the case:And so, as self-awareness cannot be the case,What is perceiving your dependent nature then?The actor,
act and object cannot be the same,And thus to apprehend itself makes little sense. (6.76)An awareness thinking, ‘I cogn
ise myself,’ implies that it itself is the thing acted upon, while the cognition, the actor, is also itself. And as its 
act is also not then separate, it follows that the actor, the acted upon and the act would be the same. These are howeve
r not seen to be the same, just like the wood-cutter, the wood and the act of cutting are not the same. Since reflexive 
awareness cannot therefore exist, it doesn’t apprehend itself. As stated in the Descent Onto Langka:Just as a sword does
not cutIts own blade; and a fingertipCannot touch itself; the same appliesTo the mind perceiving itself.7

Therefore, as reflexive awareness does not exist:If, even though it is by nature unproducedAnd isn’t known, dependent nat
ure can exist,How has the barren woman’s son offended themThat he should suffer this denial of being real? (6.77)As was 
demonstrated above, a dependent nature can be neither self- nor other-produced, and is likewise shown to be something th
at can’t be known. And if you do accept the existence of a dependent nature that is by nature unproduced and unknowable,
why should you then not also accept the existence of things that have the same status as this dependent nature? Has the
barren woman’s son harmed you in any way? A barren woman’s son too may be described as utterly unfathomable, an ineffab
le object of the noble ones’ wisdom8 , so you have to accept his existence!

If it is indeed an existent dependent nature which is, as they posit, ’… the cause for things that are but imputations…,’
9 then logically:When this dependent nature can’t exist at all,Then how can it be causing relative events?The thinking b
eing that a cause for the relative does not then exist in the slightest. And so, for them there is nothing that can actu
ally cause worldly conventional reality. How terrible!When so obsessed with substance, our opponents willJust gainsay ev
ery normal worldly principle. (6.78)Foolishly clinging to one part of substantial reality is like pouring water into the
unfired earthenware pot of the dependent nature. Due to their ignorant ways they find that they destroy everything: i.e
. worldly principles that are only sound from the worldly perspective – commands such as sit!, go!, do!, cook! and so fo
rth – as well as anything encompassed by material form, sensation and so forth. With that, nothing but failure lies ahea
d, and no good result will transpire.

And so, in their folly, these teachers insist on a path they themselves conceptually fabricate. But,There is no other met
hod that will lead to peaceApart from noble master Nāgārjuna’s way.How so? Since,But they stray from the truths, the rea
l and relative –One gains not liberation when ignoring these. (6.79)

And why will disregarding these two hinder liberation? To explain:Conventional truth works as a means to reach an end.The
ultimate is like the end one tries to reach.But those who do not see how these should be discernedAre led by faulty fan
cies down mistaken paths. (6.80)As stated in the noble Absorption Revealing Reality:The knowers of the world themselves 
declared,And not by hearsay, that there are two truths:The relative and the ultimate.There is no such thing as a third t
ruth.That beings may benefit from developingFaith in the bliss-gone ones,For beings’ sake the Victor taughtThe relative 
to aid the world.Relatively the Lion of Men wouldIdentify six classes of beings:Hell-beings, animals and spirits,Demigod
s, humans and gods.You, so incomparable, taught about beingsOf the world in all their distinctions:In terms of social ra
nk, the high and low,As citizens, the rich and the poor,As slaves and servants,Men, women and neuters.The wise who have 
understood relative truthTeach in this way to aid the world.Cyclic beings drawn to these statesAre driven by the eight c
oncerns of beings:Gain and loss, fame and disrepute,Praise and blame, pleasure and pain.When success is gained attachmen
t grows,While encountering loss upsets their minds;The rest may be similarly represented.These eight sicknesses cause co
nstant harm.Do understand that their judgement is mistakenWho profess the relative to be the ultimate.Those who say the 
repulsive is appealing,Suffering is pleasure, who claim an inherent selfWhere there is no self, who say the impermanentI
s permanent; they hold to signs who are thus inclined,And when learning of the doctrine of the SugataThey will fear it, 
and lacking understanding reject it.And those who reject the teachings of the SugataWill suffer unbearably in the realms
of hell.Immature children who unwisely pursue pleasureWill endure abundant sufferings.Only those who do not err, but un
derstandThe teachings that benefit the world,Can shed them like a worn-out serpent skin,Pass beyond existence and find p
eace.‘All phenomena lack inherent existence,Are empty and signless – that is the ultimate.’Those who hear this and rejoi
ce,Will find the unsurpassed awakening.10Victorious One, you who see the lack of skandhas,The absence of all elements an
d sense fields,That this house of faculties lacks all identity,O Sage, you see all things to be like this.11So how can t
here ever be liberation for those separated from the relative and ultimate truths? Hence, these proponents of consciousn
ess certainly stray, following mistaken pathways due to their erroneous ideas.To teach the conventional truth is a metho
d. As stated:What is heard and what is taughtIs the inexpressible dharma –Nothing expressed apart from superimpositions,
But heard and taught nonetheless.12Only by basing oneself on the conventional truth can the ultimate be taught. And by u
nderstanding the teachings on the ultimate, the ultimate state can be attained. As stated in the Treatise:Without relyin
g on the conventionalThe ultimate cannot be indicated.Without relying on the ultimateTranscendence cannot be reached.13T
o teach the ultimate is what the method aims to do, what it should result in; meaning that it is what is aimed for, the 
result, that to be attained, or what should be understood.

