A quote from the scriptures will serve to illustrate the genuine state of all dharmas. The noble Ten Grounds states:O vic
tor heirs. The bodhisattvas who have fully completed the path on the fifth bodhisattva ground, enter the sixth bodhisatt
va ground engaging with the ten equalities of dharmas. Which ten? They are all dharmas’ equality as featureless; all dha
rmas’ equality as without characteristics; and in the same way their equality in being without arising, unproduced, deta
ched, pure from the outset, unelaborate, without adoption and without rejection; all dharmas’ equality in being like ill
usions, dreams, optical distortions, echoes, a moon in the water, reflections and apparitions; and all dharmas’ equality
in the non-duality of things and non-things. When they realise the nature of all dharmas to be in this way, through the
ir acumen and resultant tolerance they attain the sixth bodhisattva ground, Presence.1

Thus, here only the reasoning of the equality of dharmas in being without production2 is explained. The intention being t
hat, by virtue of that, the other types of equality will be easily understood. As master Nāgārjuna sets forth in the beg
inning of the Middle Way Treatise:Not from self, not from other,Not from both, nor without a causeAre entities ever prod
ucedAt any point as anything.3Ever (jātu) means at any time. The term at any point (kecana) is a locative relative prono
un (‘support’-word) and synonym for somewhere (kvacid), and can indicate location, time, or tenet-system. The word anyth
ing is a relative pronoun (‘supported’-word) expressing outer or inner entities. Thus, one could here elaborate the sent
ence and say, ‘Outer and inner entities are not produced from self with respect to any place, time or tenet-system.’ Her
e, when it says not (na), this relates to production from self as an argument for existence, and not to being existent, 
since the refutation of that is implicit. This should likewise be applied to the other three assertions.Having thus reit
erated this fourfold thesis, in order to prove it through reasoning, it was stated:It can’t come from itself, and how fr
om other things?Can’t come from both, how could it be without a cause?The sense of the statement, ‘Not produced from sel
f …’ is as is stated here: ‘It can’t come from self ….’ The remaining statements should be similarly linked.

