The Second Ground: Immaculate

Now, in terms of the second, it was said:Provided with pure traits of perfect disciplineThey shun misconduct’s blemish ev
en when they dream,Since all forms of supreme understanding related to what we call ‘grounds’ are in nature one and the 
same, it is from the point of view of the qualities which would not arise in their absence, and the preeminent features 
of the perfection in question, such as moral discipline, that explanations of the special features of the second resolve
and so forth are given. In the present context, moral discipline (śīla) is so called since, when one is not under the s
way of the afflictions and misdeeds do not occur, this has a cooling effect (śīta) in the sense of quelling the fires th
at negatively affect the mind. Alternatively, being the very cause of happiness, it is the appropriate thing to rely on 
for holy beings.1 Its particular characteristic is the seven avoidances.2 The three dharmas – non-attachment, non-anger 
and having a correct view – are the motivating factors. As such, it is in terms of a moral discipline combined with thes
e motivational factors that the tenfold path of conduct is taught. Perfect discipline refers to a preeminent form of mor
al discipline, and pure traits means the qualities are purified. Here, these are joined together in the phrase ‘pure tra
its of perfect discipline’. Since their qualities have been fully purified, their moral discipline is particularly exalt
ed. And since the bodhisattva has that, even in the dream state he is not marred by the stains of faulty moral disciplin
e.

How then is it that such perfect discipline leads to completely pure qualities? Concerning such bodhisattvas who have rea
ched the second bodhisattva ground:And cultivate the tenfold path of righteous actsWith ways immaculate in body, speech 
and mind. (2.1)As stated among other things in the context of the second bodhisattva ground:O victor heirs. Bodhisattvas
dwelling on the bodhisattva ground Immaculate naturally abstain from killing. They avoid sticks and weapons. They avoid
hostility. Filled with conscientiousness and compassion, their attitude towards all living beings is one of love and be
nevolence, wishing for their welfare and happiness. Even the mere thought of causing harm to sentient beings is absent, 
no need then to mention actually singling out a particular sentient being and deliberately inflicting serious physical h
arm to them.They abstain from taking what is not given, being content with their own possessions and filled with benevol
ence. They are careful with the possessions of others, and considering things owned by others as others’ property, have 
no intention to steal. Since they would not take even a blade of grass or a leaf, there’s no need then to mention taking
actual necessities of life.They abstain from sexual misconduct, and being content with their own wife do not desire the
wife of another. Seeing them to be another’s wife, or that it would be improper in terms of family relationship, signs 
or dharma, they do not entertain desirous thoughts towards women belonging to another – no need then to mention direct c
ontact between the two sexual organs or unsuitable passageways.

They abstain from telling lies and are truthful, relate fact, speak in a timely fashion and act in accordance with what i
s said. As even in their dreams they do not tell lies to manipulate appearances, acceptance, wishes or ideas, there’s no
need then to mention intentionally uttering them.They abstain from divisive speech and, being free from any animosity, 
do not cause dissension among sentient beings. They do not, in order to create discord, report there what they have hear
d here, or report here what they have heard there. They do not cause disunity among the harmonious, or increase it among
the disharmonious. They do not delight in disharmony, do not enjoy disharmony, and will never utter words that create d
isharmony, irrespective of whether they are true or false.They abstain from harsh words, avoiding words that are upsetti
ng, abusive, hurt others and expose others’ faults; that are uncivilised, directly or indirectly express vulgarities, ar
e false and unpleasant on the ear; that are motivated by anger or rage, are disagreeable and upsetting, or cause others 
unease and sadness; and that are destructive to both one’s own and others mental state. Instead, they speak only words t
hat are friendly, soft, delightful, undeceiving, pleasant on the ear, agreeable, civilised, delightful to many and agree
able to many, that spread joy, create satisfaction and are uplifting to both one’s own and others mental state.

They abstain from idle chatter, and give proper responses, speak in a timely fashion, talk about facts, talk about what i
s real, talk about dharma, speak logically, are disciplined in speech, are patient and speak timely and excellent words.
As they even abstain from making any form of unsuitable jokes, there’s no need then to mention words that cause agitati
on.They have no covetousness, and do not desire the wealth, pleasures, enjoyments, or goods owned by others. They do not
desire, wish for, or have any sense of longing for these things.They have no malice, and relate to sentient beings with
a loving mind, a wish to help, a mind of compassion, a joyous and tender mind, wishing only to be of benefit to all bei
ngs. Avoiding aggression, resentment, enmity, grudges, malice and anything that leads to anger, every thought they have 
is one of love.They abstain from wrong views, hold correct views and follow the correct path. Avoiding the views of divi
nation, various auspicious signs and faulty discipline,3 they uphold truthful and honest views involving no deception, a
nd remain dedicated to the Buddha, the Dharma and the Sangha.4Of these, the first three paths of virtuous action are pra
cticed with the body, the middle four with speech, and the last three with mind. In this way they observe the tenfold pa
th of virtuous conduct.

Is this path of conduct not then practiced by bodhisattvas of the initial resolve? They too do practice it, but:And it is
in this tenfold virtuous pathThey now excel, becoming purer still.This is not the case for bodhisattvas with the initia
l resolve.Forever stainless, like the autumn moon,It beautifies them with a peaceful glow. (2.2)Peaceful refers to restr
ained faculties. Glow describes their radiant physical appearance.

Even having this type of completely pure discipline,Believing discipline to be by nature pureWill in itself deprive it of
its purity.As stated in the Heap of Jewels Sutra:Kāśyapa. There are certain mendicants who uphold moral discipline, abi
ding strictly by the vows of personal liberation to the extent that they are fearful even of the most subtle transgressi
on in relation to maintaining perfect ritual procedures and a proper environment. Having adopted this way, they follow t
he foundations of training becoming completely pure in body, speech and mind. But even though they maintain a completely
pure way of life, they profess that there is a self. Kāśyapa. This is a mistaken form of moral discipline. It is the fi
rst type of feigned moral discipline.…Kāśyapa. There are also some mendicants who adopt the twelve ascetic practices,5 b
ut with a reference point, maintaining their self-clinging and clinging to ownership. Kāśyapa. This is a mistaken form o
f moral discipline. It is the fourth type of feigned moral discipline.6And thus they never harbour any concepts whichCon
sider a distinction in the threefold sphere. (2.3)They are without a dualistic mind distinguishing entities and non-enti
ties and so forth in relation to the three spheres: a sentient being in relation to which there is abstention, something
abstained from and someone abstaining.

Having thus stated how it is that bodhisattvas possess perfect moral discipline, the following provides an explanation of
how perfect moral discipline, maintained by others in general, is of much greater consequence than being generous and s
o forth, and that it is the very support for all perfect qualities.Although a person’s moral footing is corrupt,To give 
grants affluence though in the lower realms.Through generosity, benefactors who uphold moral discipline will find themse
lves in situations of perfect and lavish affluence among gods or humans. But if lacking the legs of moral discipline, th
ey fall into the lower miserable states, born as ephemeral hell-beings; cows, horses, elephants, or monkeys; nāgas and s
o on; or deprived spirits with great magical powers and so on; enjoying various types of excellent prosperity in these s
tates of existence. Therefore,But when the funds and profits have been fully spent,One can’t expect that there will be a
future yield. (2.4)Someone may plant very few seeds but gain a great harvest, and to further the yield replant many mor
e seeds. In this way they may in due time gain a great profit that can continuously increase. But those who are wasteful
will foolishly spend the original seeds, and with that both the capital and potential profit is squandered. How will a 
truly excellent yield then ever be brought forth? Similarly, when lacking moral discipline, one ends up experiencing aff
luence in wretched states of being. With such utter foolishness it becomes impossible to continue enjoying prosperity, s
ince one cannot stimulate what might yet come and is spending all that has already been gained.

Not only is it extremely difficult to gain a situation of perfect resources for someone bereft of the legs of discipline,
it is also said to be extremely difficult for them to rise again once they have plunged into the lower miserable states
. Thus, it was stated:If one is free and in an advantageous stateBut makes no further effort to remain therein,When fall
ing into the abyss, all free will lost,How will one manage to escape these states again? (2.5)If at this point, when dwe
lling in the states of gods, humans and so forth, and being able to follow one’s own wishes without being reliant on ano
ther – like a mighty warrior dwelling in a conducive place free from bondage – one then makes no effort to uphold onesel
f, one will end up in the lower states – like a warrior captured and thrown into a deep ravine – how will one then ever 
emerge again? At that point, due to all the harm one causes, one is certain to continue traipsing through lower states o
f existence. It is taught that due to that, ‘Even if one is born among humans, two consequences will manifest.’7

Since a great many misdeeds accrue with such faulty discipline,And thus, as soon as generosity was taught,The Victor then
went on to speak of discipline.The Victor, who conquered all negative dharmas, therefore gave the teachings on moral di
scipline directly following the teachings on generosity, in order that positive qualities connected with generosity and 
so forth not go to waste. Because,If in the field of discipline one’s qualitiesCan flourish, yields can be perpetually e
njoyed. (2.6)Since it is the support for all positive qualities, moral discipline is itself a field. If qualities that c
ome from generosity and so forth can flourish there, the continual and uninterrupted succession of causes and results wi
ll lead to a flourishing bounty of good results that one can enjoy for a long time; otherwise not.

Accordingly,For ordinary beings, those born from his words,Those who will self-awaken and the conqueror’s heirs,It’s disc
ipline and nothing else that is the causeThat brings about true excellence and higher states. (2.7)As stated:Treading th
ese paths of ten non-virtuous actions to a greater degree is a cause for the states of hell; to a middling degree is a c
ause for the animal states; while to a lesser degree is a cause for the world of Yama. Killing leads to the hell states,
leads to the animal states, leads to the world of Yama. And even if one is born among humans, two consequences manifest
: one will have a short life and much disease. Taking what is not given leads to the hell states … (and so forth), one w
ill be materially poor and have to share possessions. Sexual misconduct leads to the hell states … (and so forth), one w
ill have an unreliable retinue and an unruly wife. Lying leads to the hell states … (and so forth), one will be denigrat
ed and tricked by others. Slander leads to the hell states … (and so forth), one will have a disharmonious and cruel ret
inue. Harsh language leads to the hell states … (and so forth), one will hear unpleasant sounds and end up in quarrels. 
Idle chatter leads to the hell states … (and so forth), one’s words will not be accepted and one will lack eloquence. Co
vetousness leads to the hell states … (and so forth), one will lack satisfaction and have much desire. Malice leads to t
he hell states … (and so forth), one will not find help but be harmed by others. Wrong view leads to the hells states, l
eads to the animal states, leads to the world of Yama. And even if one is born among humans, two consequences manifest: 
one will be influenced by negative views and be deceptive.

These paths of ten non-virtuous actions thus result in the amassing of boundless stockpiles of suffering8 …, but by takin
g up the paths of the ten virtuous actions one will take rebirth amongst gods or humans, or even at the very peak of exi
stence. On top of that, if these ten virtuous ways are cultivated with intelligence and a limited attitude, fear of the 
three realms, without great compassion, following what one has learnt from others and emulating their words, one will su
cceed in the hearer vehicle. Further, if without relying on others one can reach awakening for oneself, but lacks great 
compassion and skilful means, and is purified through fully understanding profound interdependence, one will succeed in 
the solitary buddha vehicle. Even more so, those who train with a truly vast and limitless broad mind, compassion and ma
stery in skilful means, have made vast aspiration prayers without ever abandoning any sentient being, and aim for the va
st wisdom of buddhahood reach purity, will accomplish the utterly pure bodhisattva grounds and the vast utterly pure pra
ctices of the perfections.9Thus, this is clearly indicating that unless one follows these paths of the ten virtuous acti
ons – in conformity with the respective paths of ordinary beings, hearers, solitary buddhas or bodhisattvas – there is n
o other method for reaching the samsaric happiness of higher states or achieving the excellent goal, the authentic state
of liberation naturally beyond both happiness and suffering.

Regarding these bodhisattvas of the second resolve:Like corpse and sea will not remain in company,Like luck and mishap ar
e not seen to coexist,The eminent who are upholding disciplineWill not with those of wayward conduct wish to mix. (2.8)M
ishap is a synonym for misfortune.

To explain the distinctions in terms of perfections with respect to the above described moral discipline:When keeping dis
cipline with notions of the three –Abstention with an agent, object and an act –It’s said to be perfection that is just 
mundane.If moral discipline is practiced with notions of these three, it is taught to be a mundane perfection.It’s supra
mundane when not entertaining these. (2.9)If this discipline is without the above mentioned three notions, it is taught 
to be a supramundane perfection.

By way of reiterating the qualities of the ground thus explained, the section on the perfection of moral discipline is co
ncluded with the verse:The moon-born victor’s heir – the glory of this worldWhile yet transcending it – completely free 
from stain;Immaculate, just like a soothing autumn moonDispelling all the agonies in beings’ minds. (2.10)The word immac
ulate is used in the sense of being free from stains through the path of the ten virtues, and is the descriptive name of
the second bodhisattva ground. Just as the stainless shimmer of the autumn moon clears away the agonies of beings, the 
immaculate moonlight of the victor’s heirs clears away the agonies created by faulty moral discipline. They cannot be in
cluded within cyclic existence, thus are transcending it, but are still the glory of this world, because they exhibit al
l perfect qualities and possess the cause for the splendour of a lord of the four continents.

This concludes the second resolve from the Commentary to Entering the Middle Way.

