Some might think: ‘Say one accepts that not being inherently produced it is not spent,1 and this is why there can be a ri
pening result. In that case, since the ripening manifests without it having ceased, there will likewise be another ripen
ing after the initial ripening has taken place because it hasn’t been spent. And, since after that ripening there will b
e yet another ripening, this leads to the fault of infinite regress.’ This will not be the case:Just as with cataracts o
ne will see hairsAnd not just any other random thing,Although as non-existents they’re the sameThe ripened won’t be ripe
ning again. (6.41)As an example, take objects that are similar in that they are nonexistent: someone with cataracts will
see nonexistent objects such as strands of hair, but not the appearance of other types of things, such as a donkey’s ho
rns and a barren woman’s child. Likewise, while the natures of karmas are equal in their non-cessation, they have specif
ic ripening results.

This example not only shows that karma isn’t unspecific, but also that its maturation is specific. To explain:The negativ
e will therefore further woe,While virtues lead to what is fortunate.It’s freedom to see neither good nor bad.To questio
n karmic links was still deterred. (6.42)Though virtuous and non-virtuous karmas lack intrinsic essence, still, just as 
there is a sense of certainty for the one seeing hair strands, non-virtue will not have have a pleasant outcome while vi
rtue will not have an unpleasant outcome. When not apprehending karma as virtuous and non-virtuous one is liberated. The
Illustrious One saw that if ordinary beings were to enter into very detailed analyses of it, they could end up denying 
karmic consequences and demolishing the relative. Stating that, ‘The workings of karmic consequences are inconceivable,’
he thus discouraged speculation about the workings of karmic actions and results.

‘If this is how the relationship between karmic actions and results is posited, when it is stated in the Descent Onto Lan
ka2 that the substrate consciousness is the basis of all the unlimited particular potentials, containing the seeds that 
cause the production of all things, like the ocean is for the waves, can this then be something utterly unproduced in ev
ery respect?’That is not how it is, because the statements presenting this as something existent were given in order to 
instruct disciples. It should be understood that it is as an approximation of the nature of all things that what is in f
act emptiness is described with the term substrate consciousness. Not only is the substrate consciousness then existent,
but the person too exists – such statements of their existence are given in order to nurture individuals who need to be
trained. It was for instance stated:O mendicants. The five aggregates are the burden. The carrier of the burden is the 
person.3To some it was taught that there are only the aggregates; and terms such as mind, mentation and consciousness we
re used when explaining that, ‘By immersing oneself with faith, moral discipline and so forth, one will improve, and in 
future lives take rebirth in the higher realms.’ But all such teachings were given with intentional ambiguity.If one won
ders what the intention behind them was, it is said:And so, for those who are not able toAccommodate the most profound o
f views,He taught a substrate, that the person doesExist, that aggregates alone exist. (6.43)The kinds of students who h
ave previously had prolonged exposure to misguided (tīrthika) views will struggle to assimilate the profound nature of t
hings (dharmatā), and become frightened when hearing statements such as, ‘I am not, nor will I be ….’4 When from the ver
y outset they relate to the instructions of the Teacher like they would the edge of a precipice, backing away from it, t
hey will not accomplish the supreme goal. By initially presenting them with such topics as the substrate consciousness, 
their misguided beliefs are counteracted as they are steered towards the greater purpose of these instructions. Since th
ey will later, when gaining an unmistaken understanding of the teachings, naturally abandon these, it is definitely a be
neficial approach and in no way mistaken. As Āryadeva explained:One should first of all assessTheir particular inclinati
ons.If estranged they will never becomeVessels for the sacred Dharma.5

For didactic reasons not only did he teach topics such as the substrate consciousness, but also:He taught by saying I and
mine, althoughFree from the view of an identity.And likewise, though things lack inherent truth,He taught provisionally
that they exist. (6.44)Although he had relinquished any ego and mine by leaving behind the identity view in its entiret
y, as worldly convention uses terms such as I and mine as a means of communication, the Illustrious One taught using the
expressions I and mine. Similarly, although things do not have an intrinsic nature, teaching that they exist can be a m
eans for leading the worldly to understanding, and thus he taught their existence.As stated at length in the Verses Agre
eing with the Pūrvaśaila School:If the guides of the worldDid not conform with the world,Nobody would know about BuddhaO
r the Buddhist teachings.While knowing that the aggregates,Elements and sense fields are of one nature,He taught about t
he three realmsTo accord with the world.Though phenomena are unnameable,He expressed himself to beingsUsing an inconceiv
able variety of termsTo accord with the world.He taught the non-existence of things,While dwelling in the nature of awak
eningWhere there is no non-existence at all,To accord with the world.Though seeing no objects nor non-objects,The suprem
e of speakers professedCessation and the ultimate truthTo accord with the world.Though being without destruction and cre
ationThings are equal in the realm of phenomena,He taught about the inferno of the aeonTo accord with the world.Although
the nature of sentient beingsIs not observed throughout the three times,He taught about the characters of beingsTo acco
rd with the world.6

