The Eight Ground: Immovable

In terms of the eight resolve it was said:To reach yet even greater virtue than beforeThese mighty beings enter the Immov
ableWhere they acquire irreversibility.The bodhisattvas now enter Immovable, the eight bodhisattva ground where they bec
ome irreversible in order to achieve even greater virtue than previously. Concerning the attainment of even greater virt
ue than before, it is stated:O sons of the Victor, it is just like an ocean-going ship. It needs to be dragged with much
toil before it reaches the water, but as soon as it’s afloat it is propelled by the strength of the wind and no more ef
fort is needed. The distance it can run across the ocean in a single day is infinitely longer than could be achieved in 
even a hundred years of dragging it across land. Likewise, O sons of the Victor, when bodhisattvas have gathered a great
many roots of virtue in their practice of the Greater Vehicle, and then reach the ocean of bodhisattva activity, a sing
le moment of spontaneous wisdom will take them infinitely closer to the wisdom of omniscience than all their previous ef
fort could accomplish in a hundred thousand aeons.1Their aspirations being fully pure, they areNow roused from their ces
sation by victorious ones. (8.1)The ten innumerable hundred thousand aspirations they made in the context of the first r
esolve, such as those expressed in the Ten Great Aspirations, now become completely purified, greatly increasing the pre
sent perfection of aspiration. But while the bodhisattvas on Immovable are defined as being on the ground of the heirs, 
they become regents on the ninth, and are crowned as wheel-turning monarchs on the tenth. So as the bodhisattvas on the 
Immovable ground have entered into cessation, the illustrious buddhas will then rouse them from this cessation.

As stated:O heirs of the Victor. As the bodhisattvas on the Immovable bodhisattva ground are empowered by their past aspi
rations and have settled within the entrance to Dharma, the illustrious buddhas influence them with their tathāgata wisd
om, and speak the following: ‘Excellent, O son of good family, excellent! You have now reached acceptance of the ultimat
e in accordance with the Buddha’s teachings. However, O son of good family, you still do not possess the ten powers, fou
r confidences and so forth as I do, and must apply yourself in order to gain these perfect qualities of buddhahood. You 
must be diligent! But do not abandon this door of acceptance! O son of good family, although you are now resting within 
the liberation of peace, you must consider the ordinary immature beings who are not at peace, who being ravaged by many 
afflictions and beleaguered by swarms of conceptual thoughts, are not at all at peace. O son of good family, remember th
e aspirations you made in the past! …’… If the illustrious buddhas did not2 thus influence the bodhisattvas with their o
mniscient wisdom, they would pass into complete nirvana … [and so forth].3

Because they have now been roused from cessation,No blemish will maintain its hold upon the non-desirous mind,And so, upo
n the eight ground stains are severed, utter peace attained.Afflictions at an end, they now surpass the triple realm, an
d stillThe space-like boundless wealth of all the buddhas lies beyond their reach. (8.2)As the sun of non-conceptual wis
dom rises, the gloom of the afflictions that has caused birth in the three realms is completely eradicated, and true pea
ce ensues. But, even though they have abandoned this and are now supreme among the three levels of the world, at this st
age the bodhisattvas are still not yet able to achieve the boon of the illustrious buddhas. To gain that they must exert
themselves further. As it says, ‘they would pass into complete nirvana …,’4 since they can now be free from the attachm
ent of the three realms. Without being free from attachment, nirvana is not possible.

It might be asked, ‘If they are now freed from the attachment of the three realms, how are they then able to perfect all 
the qualities of buddhahood when samsara has ceased?’To explain:Although samsara has been stopped, they have attained th
e powers ten,And through these, manifest in various ways to beings of the world. (8.3)Although samsara has ceased at thi
s point, the ten powers are now born in them, and by means of these they can manifest their mental body in a variety of 
different forms. It is therefore not contradictory that they can continue to completely fulfil their accumulations.As fo
r the ten powers, they are as stated:(1) They have mastery of life in terms of blessing their lifespan to last for inexp
ressible upon inexpressible aeons. (2) They have mastery of mind in terms of immersing themselves in the wisdom of immea
surable meditative concentrations. (3) They have mastery of material implements in terms of displaying the blessing of a
dorning all the realms of the world with many adornments. (4) They have mastery of karma in terms of revealing the impac
t of an action’s result at its particular time. (5) They have mastery of birth in terms of the ability to display birth 
within any world. (6) They have mastery of prayer as they can display true and complete buddhahood in any buddha field a
t any time desired. (7) They have mastery of aspirations as they can display within any world system vast arrays of budd
has. (8) They have mastery of miraculous abilities as they can display magical emanations in all buddha fields. (9) They
have mastery of wisdom as they can display a Tathāgata’s powers, confidences, unique buddha qualities, perfect marks an
d signs, as well as true and complete awakening. (10) They have mastery of Dharma as they can teach the dharma in any fo
rm that is without centre or limit.5The explanation of the eight resolve has thus been completed.

This was the eight resolve from the Commentary to Entering the Middle Way.

